docs: gather all prometheus installation scenarios in one document (#2784)
SumoLogic/sumologic-kubernetes-collection: docs/prometheus.md

    - [Disable Sumo Logic Prometheus Operator](#disable-sumo-logic-prometheus-operator)

  - [Prepare Sumo Logic Configuration to work with existing Operator](#prepare-sumo-logic-configuration-to-work-with-existing-operator)

  - [Using existing Kube Prometheus Stack](#using-existing-kube-prometheus-stack)

    - [Build Prometheus Configuration](#build-prometheus-configuration)

## No Prometheus in the cluster

If you don't have Prometheus or Kube Prometheus Stack installed in your cluster
there is not much you need to worry about.
There is no special configuration required, unless you want to have
[Custom Application Metrics](/docs/collecting-application-metrics.md) or
[Custom Kubernetes Metrics](/docs/collecting-kubernetes-metrics.md),
but these steps can be performed after initial installation.

## Prometheus Operator in the cluster

If you already have Prometheus operator in your cluster, the necessary changes depend on the compatibility between Prometheus Operator used in your cluster and Prometheus Operator used by Sumo Logic Kubernetes Collection.

In that situation we support three scenarios:

> - Installing Sumo Logic Prometheus Operator side by side with existing Operator
> 
>   __NOTE:__ This is possible if Custom Resource Definitions in the cluster are compatible with those required by Sumo Logic,
>   or there is possibility to install Custom Resource Definition which will be accepted by all
>   Prometheus Operators
> - Using existing Operator to create Sumo Logic Prometheus instance
> 
>   __NOTE:__ This is possible if Custom Resource Definitions in the cluster are compatible with those required by Sumo Logic,
>   or there is possibility to install Custom Resource Definition which will be accepted by all
>   Prometheus Operators
> 
> - Using existing Kube Prometheus Stack

Author: ```suggestion
1. Installing Sumo Logic Prometheus Operator side by side with existing Operator

   __NOTE:__ This is possible if Custom Resource Definitions in the cluster are compatible with those required by Sumo Logic,
   or there is possibility to install Custom Resource Definition which will be accepted by all
   Prometheus Operators

1. Using existing Operator to create Sumo Logic Prometheus instance

   __NOTE:__ This is possible if Custom Resource Definitions in the cluster are compatible with those required by Sumo Logic,
   or there is possibility to install Custom Resource Definition which will be accepted by all
   Prometheus Operators

1. Using existing Kube Prometheus Stack
```

1. Installing Sumo Logic Prometheus Operator side by side with existing Operator

   __NOTE:__ This is possible if Custom Resource Definitions in the cluster are compatible with those required by Sumo Logic,
   or there is possibility to install Custom Resource Definition which will be accepted by all
   Prometheus Operators

1. Using existing Operator to create Sumo Logic Prometheus instance

   __NOTE:__ This is possible if Custom Resource Definitions in the cluster are compatible with those required by Sumo Logic,
   or there is possibility to install Custom Resource Definition which will be accepted by all
   Prometheus Operators

1. Using existing Kube Prometheus Stack

    - [Set Sumo Logic Prometheus Operator to observe installation namespace](#set-sumo-logic-prometheus-operator-to-observe-installation-namespace)

  - [Using existing Operator to create Sumo Logic Prometheus instance](#using-existing-operator-to-create-sumo-logic-prometheus-instance)

    - [Disable Sumo Logic Prometheus Operator](#disable-sumo-logic-prometheus-operator)

  - [Prepare Sumo Logic Configuration to work with existing Operator](#prepare-sumo-logic-configuration-to-work-with-existing-operator)

  - [Using existing Kube Prometheus Stack](#using-existing-kube-prometheus-stack)

    - [Build Prometheus Configuration](#build-prometheus-configuration)

## No Prometheus in the cluster

If you don't have Prometheus or Kube Prometheus Stack installed in your cluster
there is not much you can worry about.
There is no special configuration required, unless you want to have
[Custom Application Metrics](/docs/collecting-application-metrics.md) or
[Custom Kubernetes Metrics](/docs/collecting-kubernetes-metrics.md),
but these steps can be performed after initial installation.

## Prometheus Operator in the cluster

> If you already have Prometheus operator in your cluster, the things can be less or more complicated.
> It depends on compatibility of Prometheus Operator used in your cluster and Prometheus Operator used by Sumo Logic Kubernetes Collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you already have Prometheus operator in your cluster, the necessary changes depend on the compatibility between Prometheus Operator used in your cluster and Prometheus Operator used by Sumo Logic Kubernetes Collection.
```

In that situation we support three scenarios:

- Installing Sumo Logic Prometheus Operator side by side with existing Operator

  __NOTE:__ This is possible if Custom Resource Definitions in the cluster are compatible with those required by Sumo Logic,
  or there is possibility to install Custom Resource Definition which will be accepted by all
  Prometheus Operators
- Using existing Operator to create Sumo Logic Prometheus instance

  __NOTE:__ This is possible if Custom Resource Definitions in the cluster are compatible with those required by Sumo Logic,
  or there is possibility to install Custom Resource Definition which will be accepted by all
  Prometheus Operators

> - Using existing Kube Prometheus Stack

Reviewer: Maybe change this to a numbered list so it's easier to refer to?

Author: I do not refer to this list, but can change it

### Custom Resource Definition compatibility

> CRD versions required by Sumo Logic Collection is `v0.59.2` or newer. If you are using newer version in your cluster, you probably don't have to do anything.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sumo Logic collection requires CRD version of `v0.59.2` or newer. If you are using a newer version in your cluster, you probably don't have to do anything.
```

> Otherwise, ensure that the Custom Resource Definitions won't break your existing Prometheus Operators and apply them using the following commands:

Author: ```suggestion
Otherwise, ensure that the Custom Resource Definitions won't break your existing Prometheus Operators and then apply them using the following commands:
```

kubectl apply --server-side --force-conflicts -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/v0.59.2/example/prometheus-operator-crd/monitoring.coreos.com_thanosrulers.yaml
```

Unfortunately there is no easy way to check which Custom Resource Definition is applied on the cluster.
The only symptom is failing installation with the following or similar error (containing `com.coreos.monitoring.v1`).

```text
Error: unable to build kubernetes objects from release manifest: error validating "": error validating data: ValidationError(Prometheus.spec): unknown field "hostNetwork" in com.coreos.monitoring.v1.Prometheus.spec
```

Required Custom Resource Definitions are listed in [Kube Prometheus Stack repository][kube-prometheus-stack-repo]

[kube-prometheus-stack-repo]: https://github.com/prometheus-community/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/kube-prometheus-stack#upgrading-an-existing-release-to-a-new-major-version

### Installing Sumo Logic Prometheus Operator side by side with existing Operator

> You can have multiple Prometheus Operators in the cluster, but you need to ensure that they do not observe the same namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can have multiple Prometheus Operators in the cluster, but you need to ensure that they do not observe the same namespace(s).
```

__Every__ Operator should have `${NAMESPACE}` as part of `--deny-namespaces` argument or shouldn't have it as part of `--namespaces` argument,
for example:

```shell
$ kubectl get deployment -l app=kube-prometheus-stack-operator -oyaml -A
apiVersion: v1
items:
- apiVersion: apps/v1
  kind: Deployment
...
      spec:
        containers:
        - args:
...
          - --deny-namespaces=${NAMESPACE},some-namespace
...
- apiVersion: apps/v1
  kind: Deployment
...
      spec:
        containers:
        - args:
...
          - --namespaces=some-namespace
...
```

#### Set Sumo Logic Prometheus Operator to observe installation namespace

Limit observed namespaces to `${NAMESPACE}` in `user-values.yaml`

```yaml
kube-prometheus-stack:
  prometheusOperator:
    namespaces:
      releaseNamespace: true

> ```

Author: Imho it should be default for our collection

Author: rethinked it, and defaulting it can be problematic for setups where we are the only Proemtheus in the cluster

After that, please follow to [Prepare Sumo Logic Configuration to work with existing Operator](#prepare-sumo-logic-configuration-to-work-with-existing-operator)

### Using existing Operator to create Sumo Logic Prometheus instance

Ensure that the `${NAMESPACE}` is being watched by your operator.
For exactly one operator it should be part of `--namespaces` argument or shouldn't be part of `--deny-namespaces` argument.

> In the following example both of operators are going to watch `${NAMESPACE}` (which is incorrect, but shows two ways to observe the namespace):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example both operators are going to watch `${NAMESPACE}` (which is incorrect, but shows two ways to observe the namespace):
```

```shell
$ kubectl get deployment -l app=kube-prometheus-stack-operator -oyaml -A
apiVersion: v1
items:
- apiVersion: apps/v1
  kind: Deployment
...
      spec:
        containers:
        - args:
...
          - --deny-namespaces=some-namespace
...
- apiVersion: apps/v1
  kind: Deployment
...
      spec:
        containers:
        - args:
...
          - --namespaces=${NAMESPACE},other-namespace
...
```

#### Disable Sumo Logic Prometheus Operator

If the Sumo Logic Prometheus should be managed by external Operator, you need to disable installation of Sumo Logic Operator by merging the following configuration to your `user-values.yaml`.

```yaml
kube-prometheus-stack:
  prometheusOperator:
    enabled: false
```

> After that, please follow to [Prepare Sumo Logic Configuration to work with existing Operator](#prepare-sumo-logic-configuration-to-work-with-existing-operator)

Author: ```suggestion
Next, please follow to [Prepare Sumo Logic Configuration to work with existing Operator](#prepare-sumo-logic-configuration-to-work-with-existing-operator)
```

### Prepare Sumo Logic Configuration to work with existing Operator

:construction: Describe how to use node-exporter from different operators

> Now it's time to build Kube Prometheus Stack configuration for Sumo Logic:

Author: ```suggestion
Now, build Kube Prometheus Stack configuration for Sumo Logic:
```

- Change Node Exporter port to avoid conflicts with other Prometheuses

  ```yaml
  kube-prometheus-stack:
    prometheus-node-exporter:
      service:

>           port: 9200
>           targetPort: 9200

Author: ```suggestion
        port: 9200
        targetPort: 9200
```

  ```

  > __NOTE:__ Change port to other value if Prometheus Node Exporter Pods are in Pending state and you see the following warning in Events:
  >
  > ```txt
  > Events:
  >   Type     Reason            Age                    From               Message
  >   ----     ------            ----                   ----               -------
  >   Warning  FailedScheduling  13m (x249 over 4h25m)  default-scheduler  0/3 nodes are available: 1 node(s) didn't have free ports for the requested pod ports, 2 node(s) didn't match Pod's node affinity/selector.
  > ```

> Gathering all together, the configuration for `user-values.yaml` should look like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ln total, the configuration for `user-values.yaml` should look like the following:
```

> To sum up, the configuration for `user-values.yaml` should look like the following:

Author: ```suggestion
Gathering all together, the configuration for `user-values.yaml` should look like the following:
```

```yaml
kube-prometheus-stack:
  prometheusOperator:
    namespaces:
      releaseNamespace: true
  prometheus-node-exporter:
    service:

>         port: 9200
>         targetPort: 9200

Author: ```suggestion
      port: 9200
      targetPort: 9200
```

  - replace

    ```yaml
    valueFrom:
      configMapKeyRef:
        name: sumologic-configmap
        key: metadataMetrics
    ```

    with

    ```yaml
    value: ${METADATA}
    ```

    where `${METADATA}` is content of `metadataMetrics` key from `sumologic-configmap` Config Map within `${NAMESPACE}`:

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    data:
      metadataLogs: collection-sumologic-metadata-logs
      metadataMetrics: collection-sumologic-remote-write-proxy
      metadataNamespace: sumologic
    kind: ConfigMap
    metadata:
      annotations:
        meta.helm.sh/release-name: collection
        meta.helm.sh/release-namespace: sumologic
      creationTimestamp: "2023-01-11T15:05:57Z"
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/managed-by: Helm
        chart: sumologic-3.0.0-beta.1
        heritage: Helm
        release: collection
      name: sumologic-configmap
      namespace: sumologic
      resourceVersion: "509256"
      uid: 1a916815-84ab-48a4-82d1-91e4df29daae
    ```

  - replace

    ```yaml
    valueFrom:
      configMapKeyRef:
        name: sumologic-configmap
        key: metadataNamespace
    ```

    with

    ```yaml
    value: ${NAMESPACE}
    ```

> After all of the changes, your Kube Prometheus Stack should looks like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After all of the changes, your Kube Prometheus Stack should look like the following:
```

> After all of this changes, your Kube Prometheus Stack should looks like the following:

Author: ```suggestion
After all of the changes, your Kube Prometheus Stack should looks like the following:
```
